Core beta v1.11 upgrade guide (#7998)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/04-upgrading-to-v1.11.md

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---
 
## Resources

> - <Constant name="core" /> [v1.11 beta changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/prep-release/nightly-release/1.11.0b2.dev10032025_18218007434/CHANGELOG.md)

Author: ```suggestion
- <Constant name="core" /> [v1.11 beta changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/prep-release/nightly-release/1.11.0b2.dev10062025_18275799839/CHANGELOG.md)
```

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

New features and functionality available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.11

### User-defined functions (UDFs) <Lifecycle status="beta" />

dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.
- **Execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution using `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`
- **DAG integration**: When executing `dbt build`, UDFs are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a section for "Deprecation warnings from jsonschemas on by default (coming soon)"

Author: Added in[ this commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/7998/commits/4fc00423ed40af4c9056c6435966fa0a89fe7e5a)

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---

# Upgrading to v1.1 <Lifecycle status="beta" />

## Resources

> - <Constant name="core" /> [v1.11 beta changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/prep-release/nightly-release/1.11.0b2.dev10062025_18275799839/CHANGELOG.md)

Author: ```suggestion
- <Constant name="core" /> [v1.11 Beta changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/v1.11.0b3/CHANGELOG.md)
```

We continue to recommend explicitly installing both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

New features and functionality available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.11

### User-defined functions (UDFs) <Lifecycle status="beta" />

dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.

> - **Native warehouse execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution.
> - **DAG integration**: UDF files are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution using `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`
- **DAG integration**: When executing `dbt build`, UDFs are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
```

- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

> - **List and select functions**: Manage UDFs by using `dbt list` and selection syntax like `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).

## Quick hits

You will find these quick hits in dbt Core v1.11:

> * The `dbt ls` command now supports nested key traversal. This makes it easier to query and filter complex metadata from your dbt project.

Reviewer: @QMalcolm do you know what this means?

Author: @graciegoheen here's the related  [issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/11919) and [PR](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/pull/11920)

Reviewer: ah ok! thank you
```suggestion
* The `dbt ls` command can now write out nested keys. This makes it easier to debug and troubleshoot your project. Example: `dbt ls --output json --output-keys config.materialized`
```

* Manifest metadata now includes `run_started_at`, providing better tracking of when dbt runs were initiated.

> * SQL-based configuration validation has been improved for models. This enables earlier detection of configuration errors during development.

Reviewer: @QMalcolm do you know what this means?

Author: @graciegoheen here's the related [issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/12046) and [PR](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/pull/12053)

Reviewer: Ah ok - I think this can be removed - this is a bug fix that we backported to 1.11.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * The dbt Catalog integration has been enhanced with new configuration options (including `file_format` support), improved validation for sources, models, and tests, and better error handling messages.

Reviewer: @QMalcolm also not sure what this means?

Author: @graciegoheen Here' s the dbt Catalog [PR](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/pull/11695) that adds `file_format` support

Reviewer: ok - looks like this was a bug that was backported to 1.10, so we don't need to include it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---

# Upgrading to v1.1 <Lifecycle status="beta" />

> 

Author: ```suggestion
:::note Installing Beta v1.11 on the command line 
When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b2`
:::
```

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

New features and functionality available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.11

### User-defined functions (UDFs) <Lifecycle status="beta" />

dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.
- **Execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution using `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`
- **DAG integration**: When executing `dbt build`, UDFs are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

> Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).

Author: ```suggestion
Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/udfs).
```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---

# Upgrading to v1.1 <Lifecycle status="beta" />

> :::note Installing Beta v1.11 on the command line 

Author: ```suggestion

:::note Installing Beta v1.11 on the command line 
```

When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b2`

> :::

Author: ```suggestion
:::

```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---

# Upgrading to v1.1 <Lifecycle status="beta" />

:::note Installing Beta v1.11 on the command line 

> When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b2`

Author: ```suggestion
When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b3`
```

> When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b3`

Reviewer: you could also use `install --upgrade --pre dbt-core`

Author: Great idea! done.

> When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install dbt-core 1.11.0b3`

Author: ```suggestion
When using Core v1.11 on the command line (not in dbt platform), you need to install a beta version of dbt-core For example, `install --upgrade --pre dbt-core`
```

dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.
- **Execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution using `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`
- **DAG integration**: When executing `dbt build`, UDFs are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/udfs).

### Deprecation warnings enabled by default (coming soon)

Coming soon to dbt Core v1.11, deprecation warnings from JSON Schema validation will be enabled by default when validating your YAML configuration files (such as `schema.yml` and `dbt_project.yml`).

> These warnings help you proactively identify and update deprecated configurations (such as misspelled config keys, deprecated properties, or incorrect data types) before they're removed in future versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These warnings help you proactively identify and update deprecated configurations (such as misspelled config keys, deprecated properties, or incorrect data types).
```

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.11 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.11
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.11
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---
 
## Resources

> - <Constant name="core" /> [v1.11 beta changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/prep-release/nightly-release/1.11.0b2.dev10062025_18275799839/CHANGELOG.md)

Author: We might have another version to cite here

Starting in 2024, <Constant name="cloud" /> provides the functionality from new versions of <Constant name="core" /> via [release tracks](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks) with automatic upgrades. If you have selected the "Latest" release track in <Constant name="cloud" />, you already have access to all the features, fixes, and other functionality included in the latest <Constant name="core" /> version! If you have selected the "Compatible" release track, you will have access in the next monthly "Compatible" release after the <Constant name="core" /> v1.11 final release.

We continue to recommend explicitly installing both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

New features and functionality available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.11

> ### User-defined functions (UDFs)

Author: Need to add:
In cloud, it's going to be, available. It won't be behind any feature flag. People can just start using it if they so desire. In OSS they'll have to install a beta version of dbt-core (e.g. pip install dbt-core 1.11.0b2). Even though in cloud it isn't behind a feature flag, the feature itself is considered beta at this point in time.

dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.
- **Native warehouse execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution.
- **DAG integration**: UDF files are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

> - **Unit test support**: Validate models that use UDFs with unit tests (you should make sure functions exist first by running `dbt build --select "+model_to_test" --empty`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Unit test support**: Validate models that use UDFs with unit tests. Make sure the functions exist by running `dbt build --select "+model_to_test" --empty` before running unit tests.
```

- **List and select functions**: Manage UDFs by using `dbt list` and selection syntax like `dbt run --resource_type function` or `dbt run --select my_function`.

> Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the UDF documentation.

Author: Need to link to UDF docs but they're not published yet.
```suggestion
Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).
```

> Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the UDF documentation.

Reviewer 2: I currently don't have a Prerequisites section in the PR, but that might change after a technical review

> Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).

Author: ```suggestion
Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the UDF documentation.
```

> Read about defining and using UDFs, and prerequisites, such as supported adapters in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).

Author: ```suggestion
Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the [UDF documentation](/docs/build/user-defined-functions).
```

### Catalog improvements

The catalog integration has been enhanced with new configuration options and validation:

- `file_format` configuration is now supported in catalog integration.
- Improved catalog and config validation for sources, models, and tests.
- Better error handling and validation messages.

### Enhanced `dbt ls` output

> The `dbt ls` command now supports nested key traversal, making it easier to query and filter complex metadata from your dbt project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `dbt ls` command now supports nested key traversal. This makes it easier to query and filter complex metadata from your dbt project.
```

### Manifest metadata enhancements

Manifest metadata now includes `run_started_at`, providing better tracking of when dbt runs were initiated.

### Improved config validation

> SQL-based configuration validation has been improved for models, catching configuration errors earlier in the development process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQL-based configuration validation has been improved for models. This enables earlier detection of configuration errors during development.
```

### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

Starting with `v1.10`, you can [manage changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

### Deprecation warnings

> Starting with `v1.10`, you began receiving deprecation warnings for dbt code that will become invalid in the future. You can use the [`dbt-autofix` tool](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) to fix invalid code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting in `v1.10`, dbt began displaying deprecation warnings for code that will become invalid in future releases. You can use the [`dbt-autofix` tool](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) to fix invalid code.
```

## Quick hits

### Bug fixes and improvements

dbt Core v1.11 includes these bug fixes and performance improvements:

- **Config parsing improvements**: Fixed multiple issues in config parsing logic for more reliable configuration handling.
- **Model and source freshness**: Resolved bugs related to model and source freshness checks.
- **Partial parsing**: Enhanced partial parsing reliability and performance.
- **JSON schema validation**: Fixed validation issues for more accurate schema checking.

> - **Tags and meta handling**: Improved processing of tags and meta configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Tags and meta handling**: Improved processing of `tags` and `meta` configurations.
```

> - **Event time quoting**: Better handling of event_time field quoting in configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Event time quoting**: Better handling of `event_time` field quoting in configurations.
```

Starting in 2024, <Constant name="cloud" /> provides the functionality from new versions of <Constant name="core" /> via [release tracks](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks) with automatic upgrades. If you have selected the "Latest" release track in <Constant name="cloud" />, you already have access to all the features, fixes, and other functionality included in the latest <Constant name="core" /> version! If you have selected the "Compatible" release track, you will have access in the next monthly "Compatible" release after the <Constant name="core" /> v1.11 final release.

We continue to recommend explicitly installing both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

New features and functionality available in <Constant name="core" /> v1.11

### User-defined functions (UDFs) <Lifecycle status="beta" />

> dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt Core v1.11 introduces support for user-defined functions (UDFs), which enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like macros, UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.
```

Key features include:

- **Define UDFs as first-class dbt resources**: Create UDF files in a `functions/` directory with corresponding YAML configuration.
- **Native warehouse execution**: Create, update, and rename UDFs as part of DAG execution.
- **DAG integration**: UDF files are built before models that reference them, ensuring proper dependency management.
- **New `function()` macro**: Reference UDFs in your models using the `{{ function('function_name') }}` Jinja macro.

> - **Unit test support**: Validate models that use UDFs with unit tests. Make sure the functions exist by running `dbt build --select "+model_to_test" --empty` before running unit tests.

Reviewer: i would recommend removing this, since we don't support unit testing UDFs _directly_

> - **List and select functions**: Manage UDFs by using `dbt list` and selection syntax like `dbt run --resource_type function` or `dbt run --select my_function`.

Reviewer: this isn't true - you build UDFs with `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"`

run is just for models

Read more about UDFs, including prerequisites and how to define and use them in the UDF documentation.

### Catalog improvements

The catalog integration has been enhanced with new configuration options and validation:

- `file_format` configuration is now supported in catalog integration.
- Improved catalog and config validation for sources, models, and tests.
- Better error handling and validation messages.

> ### Enhanced `dbt ls` output

Reviewer: what is this?

can we make this a "quick win" instead of calling it out as a feature

The `dbt ls` command now supports nested key traversal. This makes it easier to query and filter complex metadata from your dbt project.

> ### Manifest metadata enhancements

Reviewer: this should also be a quick hit

Manifest metadata now includes `run_started_at`, providing better tracking of when dbt runs were initiated.

> ### Improved config validation

Reviewer: what is this? 

quick hit?

SQL-based configuration validation has been improved for models. This enables earlier detection of configuration errors during development.

> ### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

Reviewer: i don't think we have any for this release?

Starting with `v1.10`, you can [manage changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

> ### Deprecation warnings

Reviewer: this was for 1.10 - i don't think we need to call it out for 1.11

Reviewer: unless we've switched the default? and now deprecation warnings from jsonschema validation is on by default for 1.11? if so, _**that**_ should be the explicit callout

Author: @graciegoheen  I wasn't sure if we'd want to continue to help folks through deprecations. 

@QMalcolm what is the state of deprecation warnings in the code? Happy to capture whatever users will need help with here.

Reviewer 3: We _haven't_ made the change yet so that jsonschema deprecations are default on in core. But my understanding is that we want it to be defaulted on before we do the GA of 1.11 on Nov 4th

Author: I will remove now and add in our [1.11 GA jira](https://dbtlabs.atlassian.net/browse/PRODDOCS-244)

Starting in `v1.10`, dbt began displaying deprecation warnings for code that will become invalid in future releases. You can use the [`dbt-autofix` tool](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-autofix) to fix invalid code.

## Quick hits

### Bug fixes and improvements

dbt Core v1.11 includes these bug fixes and performance improvements:

- **Config parsing improvements**: Fixed multiple issues in config parsing logic for more reliable configuration handling.
- **Model and source freshness**: Resolved bugs related to model and source freshness checks.
- **Partial parsing**: Enhanced partial parsing reliability and performance.
- **JSON schema validation**: Fixed validation issues for more accurate schema checking.
- **Tags and meta handling**: Improved processing of `tags` and `meta` configurations.
- **Event time quoting**: Better handling of `event_time` field quoting in configurations.
- **Deprecation handling**: Enhanced deprecation warning messages and reduced redundant warnings.
- **Error messages**: Improved error messaging throughout the codebase for easier debugging.

> - **Performance**: Various performance optimizations across the platform.

Reviewer: i don't think we need to call these out, unless any of them feel like "quick hits"

Author: OK I will pare this list down. I got them from the changelog.

### Dependency updates

dbt Core v1.11 updates several key dependencies to ensure compatibility and security:

- Updated minimum versions for `jsonschema`, `dbt-common`, `dbt-adapters`, and `dbt-semantic-interfaces`.
- Loosened some dependency pins for better compatibility with other Python packages.

> - Fixed dependency installation issues for smoother setup.

Reviewer: again, i don't think we need to call these out specifically?
